<!--Hello World...-->

It has been a long interruption: my PowerBook was suffering from a
known problem with some 15' models, it lost half of its RAM (I only
had 512M instead of 1G). I sent it back to Apple for repair.

Bad luck 1: It was lost by UPS, and started looping between Germany
and the Netherlands. When Apple finally got it, they repaired it in
one day and returned it to me. Bad luck 2: the machine was dead on
arrival (freezing after 5 minutes of use), and its enclosure had
apparently been damaged during transport. Return to Apple. Bad luck 3:
this time, it takes 1 week for me to just get the UPS box. I finally
send it back to Apple. This time, they changed the enclosure,
motherboard, hard disk, and a few other components. I have an
almost-new machine, but that meant I had to restore everything from
backup.

Overall, that took close to a month, during which XL development was
on hold. That was frustrating, because I had a few things not
checked-in.

Finally, I got back to where I left, which was the library
implementation of I/O routines (XL.TEXT_IO and XL.UI.CONSOLE). It was
a bit difficult to make it work, mostly because it pushes the
interface with C/C++ a bit, so I kept discovering bugs in that area,
mostly causing interface and implementation code to be inconsistent. I
added an 'externc' bytecode entry so that I could generate C++ code at
will for testing purpose (C++ testing is a bit stricter).

But finally, I have "Hello World" running in an all-XL implementation
that uses variadics, C interface code, etc.
See {cvs "TESTS/12.Library/hello_world.xl" "the test here..." }
